# EventSwarm History

EventSwarm was conceived by Aditya Sanghi, Vicente Iborra, Andrew Berry
and Zoran Milosevic in the town of Brisbane, Australia in 2007. We
wanted to build on our experience to create a fast, flexible,
event-driven programming framework. Zoran and Andrew had both worked in
event-driven software in their PhD research, and Andrew, Aditya and
Vince worked in telco billing, so were used to handling high volume data
processing.

We started with a simple social organisation app, then morphed towards
complex event processing over a period of several years. Aditya and
Vince moved onto other projects, but Andrew and Zoran stuck with it,
adding features in their spare time and occasionally spending bigger
blocks to build new applications. The intent was not to sell the
framework, but rather to offer services and products based on the CEP
implementation.

Our first serious CEP application was for monitoring stock market
trades, allowing users to define rules for notification when certain key
indicators or thresholds were hit. We started first working with the
University of New South Wales (UNSW) on some research projects. We then
had it installed with a Canadian stock market data services provider
that we know, and it’s still there but not seeing much active duty.

In late 2012, Andrew and Zoran decided to spend more time on EventSwarm
and products. We built a series of proof-of-concept implementations for
monitoring various data streams including healthcare pathology results,
social media and telco call records. EventSwarm acquitted itself well in
these implementations, but the business case was always lacking.

In 2013, we built a media monitoring application called Note8 that
focused on the needs of corporate compliance for listed companies in
Australia. This has attracted some attention and is in trial with a
number of customers, with a product launch expected in the near future
(late 2014).

[Adomita](http://adomita.com) is partnering with us in launching Note8
and has big plans for EventSwarm, but since EventSwarm itself would be
hard to sell as a product, we decided that open source was the best
route. It means that regardless of how we get along with our new
partner, EventSwarm will always be available to everyone, and
fundamentally we’ve always wanted to put something back into the
community.

Adomita is providing funding to support the open source project and keep
us employed, so we’ve given them the naming rights. We encourage you to
check out their products at http://adomita.com.

